docs: Custom Parsers cleanup/expansion (#16887)
eslint/eslint: docs/src/extend/custom-parsers.md

---

ESLint custom parsers let you extend ESLint to support linting new non-standard JavaScript language features or custom syntax in your code. A parser is responsible for taking your code and transforming it into an abstract syntax tree (AST) that ESLint can then analyze and lint.

## Creating a Custom Parser

If a `parseForESLint` method is exposed on the parser, this method will be used to parse the code. Otherwise, the `parse` method will be used. Both methods should take in the source code as the first argument, and an optional configuration object as the second argument (provided as `parserOptions` in a config file).

```javascript

> // TODO: have a simple example here w parse and parserOptions

Author: to reviewers, would you mind providing some high level direction on what should be included here? perhaps a simple example with a bit of description?

Reviewer: I think that the other [example](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/e6f47cdb2baa5c5153abf16ead00379583003492/docs/src/extend/custom-parsers.md#example) on that page is already quite clear. But you would like to add a new example with `parse` rather than `parseForESLint` if I understand correctly?

Author: yes, that's correct

Reviewer: You could show just a very simple parser, like one that calls espree and prints a message to the console. This one for example will print the time required to parse each file:

```js
const espree = require("espree");

exports.parse = function (code, options) {
    const label = `Parsing file "${options.filePath}"`;
    console.time(label);
    const ast = espree.parse(code, options);
    console.timeEnd(label);
    return ast; // Only the AST is returned.
};
```

As I understand it, the only difference is that `parse` only returns the AST, whereas `parseForESLint` also returns additional values that let you customize the behavior of the parser even more.

Reviewer 2: > As I understand it, the only difference is that parse only returns the AST, whereas parseForESLint also returns additional values that let you customize the behavior of the parser even more.

That's correct. The usage is exactly the same. I think @fasttime's example is solid -- anything where `parse` is calling another parser and somehow manipulating the AST result before returning it would also be appropriate.

Author: thank you for the feedback! also TIL about `console.time()` 💡

```

## `parse` Return Object

The `parse` method should simply return the [AST](#ast-specification) object.

> ### `parseForESLint` Return Object

Reviewer 2: Maybe a bit of heading level creep here?
```suggestion
## `parseForESLint` Return Object
```

Author: yep! good catch. i was confused i think about the difference btwn `parse` and `parseForESLint` but the above conversation https://github.com/eslint/eslint/pull/16887#discussion_r1111065150 helped clarify.

---

ESLint custom parsers let you extend ESLint to support linting new non-standard JavaScript language features or custom syntax in your code. A parser is responsible for taking your code and transforming it into an abstract syntax tree (AST) that ESLint can then analyze and lint.

## Creating a Custom Parser

A custom parser is a JavaScript object with either a `parse` or `parseForESLint` method. The `parse` method only returns the AST, whereas `parseForESLint` also returns additional values that let you customize the behavior of the parser even more.

Both methods should take in the source code as the first argument, and an optional configuration object as the second argument, which is provided as [`parserOptions`](../use/configure/language-options#specifying-parser-options) in a configuration file.

```javascript
// customParser.js

const espree = require("espree");

> // Logs the time before and after parsing each file.

Reviewer: Actually, only the duration of parsing each file is logged, i.e. only `console.timeEnd()` produces an output. I'm sorry if this was not clear from my last comment.

Author: ```suggestion
// Logs the duration it takes to parse each file.
```

function parse(code, options) {
    const label = `Parsing file "${options.filePath}"`;
    console.time(label);
    const ast = espree.parse(code, options);
    console.timeEnd(label);
    return ast; // Only the AST is returned.
};

module.exports = { parse };
```

## `parse` Return Object

The `parse` method should simply return the [AST](#ast-specification) object.

## `parseForESLint` Return Object

The `parseForESLint` method should return an object that contains the required property `ast` and optional properties `services`, `scopeManager`, and `visitorKeys`.

* `ast` should contain the [AST](#ast-specification) object.
* `services` can contain any parser-dependent services (such as type checkers for nodes). The value of the `services` property is available to rules as `context.parserServices`. Default is an empty object.

> * `scopeManager` can be a [ScopeManager](./scope-manager-interface) object. Custom parsers can use customized scope analysis for experimental/enhancement syntaxes. Default is the `ScopeManager` object which is created by [eslint-scope](https://github.com/eslint/eslint-scope).
>     * Support for `scopeManager` was added in ESLint v4.14.0. ESLint versions which support `scopeManager` will provide an `eslintScopeManager: true` property in `parserOptions`, which can be used for feature detection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `scopeManager` can be a [ScopeManager](./scope-manager-interface) object. Custom parsers can use customized scope analysis for experimental/enhancement syntaxes. The default is the `ScopeManager` object which is created by [eslint-scope](https://github.com/eslint/eslint-scope).
    * Support for `scopeManager` was added in ESLint v4.14.0. ESLint versions that support `scopeManager` will provide an `eslintScopeManager: true` property in `parserOptions`, which can be used for feature detection.
```

> * `visitorKeys` can be an object to customize AST traversal. The keys of the object are the type of AST nodes. Each value is an array of the property names which should be traversed. Default is [KEYS of `eslint-visitor-keys`](https://github.com/eslint/eslint-visitor-keys#evkkeys).
>     * Support for `visitorKeys` was added in ESLint v4.14.0. ESLint versions which support `visitorKeys` will provide an `eslintVisitorKeys: true` property in `parserOptions`, which can be used for feature detection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `visitorKeys` can be an object to customize AST traversal. The keys of the object are the type of AST nodes. Each value is an array of the property names which should be traversed. The default is [KEYS of `eslint-visitor-keys`](https://github.com/eslint/eslint-visitor-keys#evkkeys).
    * Support for `visitorKeys` was added in ESLint v4.14.0. ESLint versions that support `visitorKeys` will provide an `eslintVisitorKeys: true` property in `parserOptions`, which can be used for feature detection.
```

## AST Specification

The AST that custom parsers should create is based on [ESTree](https://github.com/estree/estree). The AST requires some additional properties about detail information of the source code.

### All Nodes

All nodes must have `range` property.

* `range` (`number[]`) is an array of two numbers. Both numbers are a 0-based index which is the position in the array of source code characters. The first is the start position of the node, the second is the end position of the node. `code.slice(node.range[0], node.range[1])` must be the text of the node. This range does not include spaces/parentheses which are around the node.

> * `loc` (`SourceLocation`) must not be `null`. [The `loc` property is defined as nullable by ESTree](https://github.com/estree/estree/blob/25834f7247d44d3156030f8e8a2d07644d771fdb/es5.md#node-objects), but ESLint requires this property. `SourceLocation#source` property can be `undefined`. ESLint does not use the `SourceLocation#source` property.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `loc` (`SourceLocation`) must not be `null`. [The `loc` property is defined as nullable by ESTree](https://github.com/estree/estree/blob/25834f7247d44d3156030f8e8a2d07644d771fdb/es5.md#node-objects), but ESLint requires this property. The `SourceLocation#source` property can be `undefined`. ESLint does not use the `SourceLocation#source` property.
```

## Creating a Custom Parser

> A custom parser is a JavaScript object with either a `parse` or `parseForESLint` method. The `parse` method only returns the AST, whereas `parseForESLint` also returns additional values that let you customize the behavior of the parser even more.

Reviewer 2: Technically, the parser is modifying how ESLint works in this case.
```suggestion
A custom parser is a JavaScript object with either a `parse` or `parseForESLint` method. The `parse` method only returns the AST, whereas `parseForESLint` also returns additional values that let the parser customize the behavior of ESLint even more.
```

The range indexes of all tokens and comments must not overlap with the range of other tokens and comments.

### The `Literal` Node

The `Literal` node must have `raw` property.

* `raw` (`string`) is the source code of this literal. This is the same as `code.slice(node.range[0], node.range[1])`.

## Packaging a Custom Parser

TODO: Add info on turning into a package

## Example

For a complex example of a custom parser, refer to the [`@typescript-eslint/parser`](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/tree/main/packages/parser) source code.

A simple custom parser that logs `"foo"` to the console when it processes a node:

```javascript
// awesome-custom-parser.js
var espree = require("espree");

> exports.parseForESLint = function(code, options) {

Author: question for reviewers: this syntax is a little different from what i'm used to seeing with Node.js. 

to my understanding, this is equivalent to the following:

```js
function parseForESLint(code, options){
// function definition
}

module.exports = { parseForESLint }
```

i *think* this `module.exports = ...` pattern is more common.

would we be open to adjusting this example to use the `module.exports = ...` pattern?

Reviewer 2: You're correct, the two are equivalent. No objections to using the pattern you suggest.

Author: adding

The range indexes of all tokens and comments must not overlap with the range of other tokens and comments.

### The `Literal` Node

The `Literal` node must have `raw` property.

* `raw` (`string`) is the source code of this literal. This is the same as `code.slice(node.range[0], node.range[1])`.

## Packaging a Custom Parser

> TODO: Add info on turning into a package

Author: to reviewers, would you mind providing some high level direction on what should be included here? perhaps a simple example with a bit of description?

Reviewer 2: Hehe, didn't realize we left a TODO in there.

Basically, what this section should be is how to create an npm package out of your custom parser. I imagine it would simply be:

1. Create your npm package
2. Ensure that `main` in `package.json` points to your parser file
3. Publish your npm package
4. Show how to use the npm package in a config file

The range indexes of all tokens and comments must not overlap with the range of other tokens and comments.

### The `Literal` Node

The `Literal` node must have `raw` property.

* `raw` (`string`) is the source code of this literal. This is the same as `code.slice(node.range[0], node.range[1])`.

## Packaging a Custom Parser

To publish your custom parser to npm, perform the following:

1. Create a custom parser following the [Creating a Custom Parser](#creating-a-custom-parser) section above.

> 1. Create an npm package for the custom parser.

Author: ```suggestion
1. [Create an npm package](https://docs.npmjs.com/creating-node-js-modules) for the custom parser.
```

1. In your `package.json` file, set the [`main`](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/package-json#main) field as the file that exports your custom parser.

> 1. Publish the npm package.

Reviewer: I won't nitpick on this, but I'm afraid that _"Create an npm package"_ and _"Publish the npm package"_ are not self-explanatory. Maybe we could like these steps to [`npm init`](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/commands/npm-init?v=true) and [`npm publish`](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/commands/npm-publish?v=true) respectively, or just show the commands to enter in the shell?

Reviewer 2: I think the wording is okay, but would be helpful to link out to some supporting documentation.

> 1. Publish the npm package.

Author: ```suggestion
1. [Publish the npm package.](https://docs.npmjs.com/creating-and-publishing-unscoped-public-packages)
```

For more information on publishing an npm package, refer to the [npm documentation](https://docs.npmjs.com/).

Once you've published the npm package, you can use it by adding the package to your project. For example:

```shell

> npm install eslint-parser-myParser

Reviewer: Elsewhere in the documentation we suggest to use the `-D` or `--save-dev` flag to install `eslint` and related packages (like [here](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/ed60afd/docs/src/use/getting-started.md?plain=1#L108-L110) or [here](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/c8c0c71/packages/js/README.md#installation)), because they are most typically only used in development. Shall we do the same here?

Author: ```suggestion
npm install eslint-parser-myparser --save-dev
```

```

Then add the custom parser to your ESLint configuration file with the `parser` property. For example:

```js
// .eslintrc.js

module.exports = {

>   parser: 'eslint-parser-myParser',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  parser: 'eslint-parser-myparser',
```

  // ... rest of configuration
};
```

To learn more about using ESLint parsers in your project, refer to [Configure a Parser](../use/configure/parser).

## Example

For a complex example of a custom parser, refer to the [`@typescript-eslint/parser`](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/tree/main/packages/parser) source code.

> A simple custom parser that logs `"foo"` to the console when it processes a node:

Reviewer 4: What do we mean by "when it processes a node"?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this description is inaccurate. What this is doing is providing a `context.parserServices.foo()` for rules.

> A simple custom parser that logs `"foo"` to the console when it processes a node:

Author: ```suggestion
A simple custom parser that provides a `context.parserServices.foo()` method to rules.
```

sorry for my misunderstanding. updated the copy
